There are two different file system formats for windows, FAT32/EXFAT or NTFS.
NTFS is the common one that is used on internal storage devices.

FAT32/EXFAT is used for external devices like flash drives.

FAT32/EXFAT doesnt use a permission system while NTFS does.

MBR and GPT Partitioning.
MBR is older and GPT is newer. GPT is a better partitioning scheme.

MBR must be installed in the first 512 bytes of the hard disk drive.
Only four standard partitions are allowed on a given storage device, and the default block size is 512 bytes. 
Because of this, we're limited to partitions with a maximum size of 2 terabytes on a storage device.

lBA logical block addressing is a work around for the limit on the storage of MBR.

GPT is part of the overall Unified Extensible Firmware Interface specification, 
(UEFI), which is designed to replace the BIOS on older computer systems to provide a much more robust software-to-hardware interface.

**ADVANTAGES OF GPT:**

1- There's no such thing, anymore, as primary, extended, or logical partitions in GPT. Every partition is just a plain old partition.

2- Every single GPT partition on the drive has a globally unique identifier (GUID) assigned to it.
A GUID is a random string of characters and numbers so long that every GPT partition on earth has its own unique identifier (at least, in theory). 

3- GPT provides fault tolerance. It does this by storing a copy of the partition table in the first and in the last sectors on the disk.
If there is a failure the redundant copy with GPT can immediately take over. As a result, the files on the disk remain accessible. 

4- GPT supports very, very large disks and partitions--we're talking about sizes measured in zebibytes instead of terabytes.

5- Windows will support 128 GPT partitions per disk. Instead of the 4 that you are limited to with MBR.

6- GPT performs a cyclic redundancy check (CRC) to verify the integrity of the partition table to make sure that it is still valid and hasn't been corrupted.

**Important to note**

Windows can only boot from a GPT partition on UEFI-based computers running a 64-bit version of Windows. 
So, if your computer still uses the older BIOS-based hardware, then you cannot use GPT partitions on the disk where your operating system is installed.

You can still use GPT on older systems as long as it is just being used to store data and not being used to boot from.

Basic disks use the older-style partition table to store partitioning information. As such, basic disks are limited to four partitions per disk. 
Dynamic disks, on the other hand, use the Logical Disk Manager database (LDM) to store information about the partitions on the disk.

**Volumes**

The simplest type of volume that you can create is called a **simple volume.** A simple volume is limited to a single drive.

The other volume type you can make is a **spanned volume.**
A spanned volume uses free space from multiple physical disks to create one single volume.

The fact that a spanned volume is created from two separate storage devices means that if one of these storage devices 
fails for some reason, then the entire spanned volume itself also fails, and you just lost all of your data.

Another type of volume you can create is called a **striped volume.** Just as with a spanned volume, a striped volume uses free space from two physical disks in the system. 
But it still presents the operating system with one single volume, and we can assign it a drive letter just like we did the simple volume and just like we did a spanned volume.

A striped volume seeks to optimize IO performance of the storage system. It does this by writing data across all the disks in 
the volume simultaneously, using small blocks of data called stripes.

Striped volumes have the same disadvantage as a spanned volume. If you lose one disk you lose all you data. The advantage of it though is that it writes data to the disk 
much faster then simple or spanned volumes do.

**Mirrored volumes** are another type of volume you can make. Mirrored volumes are used to protect data. They still use two different disk but they store a complete copy
on each disk. 

The fith type of volume you can have is a **RAID 5 volume.** With a RAID 5 we get the speed benefit associated with striping plus the redundancy benefits of a mirrored volume. 
With a RAID5 volume, we still stripe data across multiple disks, but we use parity information to provide 
redundancy such that if one of the disks go bad, we can use the parity information to reconstruct the data that was lost. 

RAID 5 requires at least 3 disks. RAID 5 volumes, natively, are only supported by server versions of Windows, not by workstation versions of Windows.

**Removing disks**

To remove a basic disk you use device manager to uninstall.

to remove a dynamic disk you use disk management to uninstall.
























